.\" $XFree86: xc/programs/Xserver/hw/xfree86/XF86_SVGA.man,v 3.25 1996/01/14 14:08:04 dawes Exp $
.TH XF86_SVGA 1 "Version 3.1.2C"  "XFree86"
.SH NAME
XF86_SVGA - non-accelerated SVGA X Window System servers for UNIX on 
x86 platforms
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B XF86_SVGA
[:displaynumber] [ option ] ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I XF86_SVGA
is an 8-bit PseudoColor, 16-bit TrueColor and 24-bit TrueColor server for
Super-VGA cards.  It is derived from
the
.I X386
server provided with X11R5.
Note: 16-bit TrueColor is currently only supported for some
Cirrus and ARK chips, and 24-bit TrueColor is only supported for some
Cirrus chips.
.SH CONFIGURATIONS
.PP
The
.I XF86_SVGA
server supports the following popular SuperVGA chipsets in 256 color mode.
Virtual resolutions up to (approximately) 1152x900 are supported, using
(up to) 1Mb of display memory.  The Western Digital WD90C33, some of
the Cirrus chipsets, and the Oak OTI087 support
up to 2Mb of display memory and virtual resolutions of 1280x1024 and higher.
Some of the Cirrus chipsets also support 16bpp and 32bpp (truecolor) modes
on certain configurations.  Some of the ARK chipsets support 16bpp modes
on certain configurations.  Generic VGA cards are also supported at 8bpp
320x200 only.
.RS .5i
.TP 4
ATI:
18800, 18800-1, 28800-2, 28800-4, 28800-5, 28800-6, 68800-3, 68800-6, 68800AX,
68800LX, 88800CX, 88800GX
.TP 4
Tseng:
ET3000, ET4000, ET4000/W32
.TP 4
Western Digital:
PVGA1, WD90C00, WD90C10, WD90C11, WD90C24A, WD90C30, WD90C31, WD90C33
.TP 4
Genoa:
GVGA
.TP 4
Trident:
TVGA8800CS, TVGA8900B, TVGA8900C, TVGA8900CL, TVGA9000
.TP 4
NCR:
77C22, 77C22E
.TP 4
Cirrus Logic:
CLGD5420, CLGD5422, CLGD5424, CLGD5426, CLGD5428, CLGD5429,
CLGD5430, CLGD5434, CLGD5436,
CLGD6205, CLGD6215, CLGD6225, CLGD6235,
CL6410, CL6412, CL6420, CL6440
.TP 4
ARK:
ARK1000PV, ARK1000VL, ARK2000PV
.TP 4
RealTek:
RTG3106
.TP 4
Compaq:
AVGA
.TP 4
Oak:
OTI067, OTI077, OTI087
.TP 4
Avance Logic:
AL2101, ALI2301, ALI2302, ALI2308, ALI2401
.TP 4
Chips & Technology:
.ig
82C451, 82C452, 82C453, 82C455, 82C456, 82C457,
..
65520, 65530, 65540, 65545
.TP 4
MX:\ \ 
MX68000, MX68010
.TP 4
Video7:
HT216-32
.RE
.PP
Accelerated support is included for most of the Cirrus chipsets,
the Western Digital WD90C31 and WD90C33 chipsets, and the Oak OTI087 chipset.
Accelerated support for the
ET4000/W32 is implemented in a separate server (see \fIXF86_W32(1)\fP).
Users of boards based on ATI's Mach8, Mach32 and Mach64 chipsets should refer
to the \fIXF86_Mach8(1)\fP, \fIXF86_Mach32(1)\fP and \fIXF86_Mach64(1)\fP
manual pages, respectively.
.SH OPTIONS
In addition to the normal server options described in the \fIXserver(1)\fP
manual page, \fIXF86_SVGA\fP accepts some more command line switches,
as described in the 
.I XFree86(1) 
manpage.
.SH SETUP
.I XFree86
uses a configuration file called \fBXF86Config\fP for its initial setup.  
See the 
.I XF86Config(4/5) 
manpage for general details. Here only the
.I XF86_SVGA
specific parts are explained.
.PP
This server requires a \fBScreen\fP section in the XF86Config file with
the \fBDriver\fP entry set to \fBsvga\fP.
.PP
Entries for the \fBDevice\fP section in the XF86Config file include:
.br
.ne 3i
.TP 8
.B chipset \fI"name"\fP
specifies a chipset so the correct driver can be used.  Possible chipsets
are:
.sp
.RS 1.5i
.TP 4
ATI:
vgawonder
.TP 4
Tseng:
et3000, et4000, et4000w32, et4000w32i, et4000w32p
.TP 4
Western Digital:
pvga1, wd90c00, wd90c10, wd90c24, wd90c30, wd90c31, wd90c33
.TP 4
Genoa:
gvga
.TP 4
Trident:
tvga8800cs, tvga8900b, tvga8900c, tvga8900cl, tvga9000 
.TP 4
NCR:
ncr77c22, ncr77c22e
.TP 4
Cirrus Logic:
clgd5420, clgd5422, clgd5424, clgd5426, clgd5428, clgd5429,
clgd5430, clgd5434, clgd5436,
clgd6205, clgd6215, clgd6225, clgd6235,
cl6410, cl6412, cl6420, cl6440
.TP 4
RealTek:
realtek
.TP 4
ARK:
ark1000pv, ark1000vl, ark2000pv
.TP 4
Compaq:
cpq_avga
.TP 4
OAK:
oti067, oti077, oti087
.TP 4
Avance Logic:
al2101, ali2301, ali2302, ali2308, ali2401
.TP 4
Chips & Technology:
.ig
ct451, ct452, ct453, ct455, ct456, ct457,
..
ct65520, ct65530, ct65540, ct65545
.TP 4
MX:\ \ 
mx
.TP 4
Video7:
video7
.TP 4
Generic:
generic
.RE
.TP 8
.B Option \fI"optionstring"\fP
allows the user to select certain options provided by the drivers.  Currently 
the following strings are recognized:
.sp
\fBlegend\fP - for Sigma Legend ET4000-based boards.  This option enables
a special clock-selection algorithm used on Legend boards, and MUST be
specified for these boards to function correctly.
.sp
\fBswap_hibit\fP - for Western Digital/PVGA1 chipsets.  Some Western Digital
based boards require the high-order clock-select lead to be inverted.  It
is not possible for the server to determine this information at run-time.
If the 9th clock in the list of clocks detected by the server is less than
30Mhz, this option likely needs to be set.
.sp
\fBhibit_low\fP, \fBhibit_high\fP - for Tseng ET4000 chipsets.  With
some ET4000 cards, the server has difficulty getting the state of the
high-order clocks select bit right when started from a high-resolution text
mode.  These options allow the correct initial state of that bit to be
specified.  To find out what the correct initial state is, start the server
from an 80x25 text mode.  This option is only needed if the clocks reported
by the server when started from a high-resolution text mode differ from
those reported when it is started from an 80x25 text mode.
.sp
\fB8clocks\fP - for the PVGA1 chipset the default is 4 clocks.  Some
cards with this chipset may support 8 clocks.  Specifying this option
will allow the driver to detect and use the extra clocks.
.sp
\fB16clocks\fP - for Trident TVGA8900B and 8900C chipsets.  Some newer boards
using 8900B and 8900C chipsets actually support 16 clocks rather than the
standard 8 clocks.  Such boards will have a "TCK9002" or "TCK9004" chip
on them.  Specifying this option will allow the driver to detect and use
the extra 8 clocks.
.sp
\fBprobe_clocks\fP - for Cirrus chipsets.  The Cirrus driver has a fixed
set of clocks that are normally used.  Specifying this option will force
the driver to probe for clocks instead of reporting the built-in defaults.
This option is for debugging purposes only.
.sp
\fBpower_saver\fP - This option enables the server
to use the power saving features of VESA DPMS compatible monitors.
The suspend level is currently not supported.
Refer to the \fIXF86Config(4/5)\fP
manual page for details of how to set the timeouts for the different levels
of operation.  This option is experimental.
.sp
\fBnoaccel\fP - for Cirrus and WD chipsets.  This option disables the
accelerated features for the clgd5426, clgd5428, wd90c24, wd90c31 and
wd90c33 chipsets.
.sp
\fBfifo_conservative\fP - for Cirrus chipsets, and oti087.  This option
sets the CRT
FIFO threshold to a conservative value for dot clocks above 65MHz.  This
reduces performance, but may help in eliminating problems with ``streaks''
on the screen during BitBLT operations
.sp
\fBfifo_aggressive\fP - for Cirrus chipsets, and oti087.  This option
sets the CRT
FIFO threshold to an aggressive value for dot clocks above 65MHz.  This
may increase performance.
.sp
\fBslow_dram\fP - for Cirrus chipsets.  This option sets the DRAM timings
for slow DRAM chips.
.sp
\fBfast_dram\fP - for ET4000 and Cirrus chipsets.  This option sets the
DRAM timings for fast DRAM chips.
.sp
\fBno_2mb_banksel\fP - for Cirrus chipsets.  This option is required for
Cirrus cards with 2MB of videoram which is in the form of 512kx8 DRAMs
(4 chips) rather than 256kx4 DRAMs (16 chips).
.sp
\fBno_bitblt\fP - for Cirrus chipsets.  This option disables use of
hardware BitBLT.
.sp
\fBlinear\fP - Attempt a linear mapping of the framebuffer into high
memory. Currently only supported for some Cirrus and oti087 configurations.
.sp
\fBmed_dram, favour_bitblt, sw_cursor, clgd6225_lcd, mmio\fP
- more Cirrus-specific options. Refer to
/usr/X11R6/lib/X11/doc/README.cirrus for a detailed description of Cirrus
options.
.ig
intern_disp (use internal display for laptops -- WD90C2x)
extern_disp (use external display for laptops -- WD90C2x)
..
.TP 8
.B speedup \fI"selection"\fP
sets the selection of SpeedUps to use.  The optional selection string can
take the following values:
.sp
.in 20
.nf
none
all
.fi
.IP
If the selection string is omitted, or if the \fBspeedup\fP option is omitted,
the selection defaults to "all".
Some of the SpeedUps can only be used with the ET4000, WD90C31 and WD90C33
chipsets and
others requires a virtual resolution with a xdim of 1024.  SpeedUps that
won't work with a given configuration are automatically disabled.
.TP 8
.B nospeedup
disables the SpeedUp code.  This is equivalent to \fBspeedup "none"\fP.
.TP 8
.B Ramdac \fI"ramdac-type"\fP
This specifies the type of RAMDAC used on the board.  Only the ARK driver
currently uses this.  RAMDAC types recognised include:
.sp
\fBatt20c490\fP - AT&T 20C490 or compatible 8-bit RAMDAC.
.sp
\fBatt20c498\fP - AT&T 20C498 or compatible 16-bit RAMDAC.
.sp
\fBzoomdac\fP - RAMDAC used by the Hercules Stingray Pro/V and 64/V.
.sp
\fBstg1700\fP - STG1700 or compatible RAMDAC.
.PP
Note that \fIXFree86\fP has some internal capabilities to determine
what hardware
it is running on. Thus normally the keywords \fIchipset\fP, \fIclocks\fP,
and \fIvideoram\fP don't have to be specified.  But there
may be occasions when this autodetection mechanism fails, (for example, too
high of load on the machine when you start the server).  For cases like this,
one should first run \fIXF86_SVGA\fP on an unloaded machine, look at the
results of the autodetection (that are printed out during server startup)
and then explicitly specify these parameters in the configuration file.
\fBIt is recommended that all parameters, especially Clock values,
be specified in the XF86Config file.\fP
.SH FILES
.TP 30
<XRoot>/bin/XF86_SVGA
The SVGA color X server
.TP 30
/etc/XF86Config
Server configuration file
.TP 30
<XRoot>/lib/X11/XF86Config
Server configuration file
.TP 30
<XRoot>/lib/X11/doc/README.ark
Extra documentation for the ARK driver
.TP 30
<XRoot>/lib/X11/doc/README.ati
Extra documentation for the ATI vgawonder driver
.TP 30
<XRoot>/lib/X11/doc/README.cirrus
Extra documentation for the Cirrus driver
.TP 30
<XRoot>/lib/X11/doc/README.trident
Extra documentation for the Trident driver
.TP 30
<XRoot>/lib/X11/doc/README.tseng
Extra documentation for the ET4000 and ET3000 drivers
.TP 30
<XRoot>/lib/X11/doc/README.Oak
Extra documentation for the Oak driver
.TP 30
<XRoot>/lib/X11/doc/README.Video7
Extra documentation for the Video7 driver
.TP 30
<XRoot>/lib/X11/doc/README.WstDig
Extra documentation for the WD/PVGA driver
.LP
Note: <XRoot> refers to the root of the X11 install tree.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
X(1), Xserver(1), XFree86(1), XF86Config(4/5), xf86config(1), xvidtune(1),
xdm(1), xinit(1)
.SH BUGS
.PP
Bug reports are welcome, and should be emailed
to the address listed below.
.SH CONTACT INFO
\fIXFree86\fP source is available from the FTP server
\fIftp.XFree86.org\fP.  Send email to
\fIXFree86@XFree86.org\fP for details.
.SH AUTHORS
.PP
Refer to the
.I XFree86(1)
manual page.
.\" $XConsortium: XF86_SVGA.man /main/10 1996/01/14 18:59:16 kaleb $
